L66: Core server RPCs will not report cancellation if completed with non-OK status (#179)
grpc/proposal: L66-core-cancellation-status.md

Core server RPCs will not report cancellation if completed with non-OK status
----
* Author(s): vpai
* Approver: markdroth
* Status: Proposed
* Implemented in: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/pull/22991
* Last updated: May 28, 2020
* Discussion at https://groups.google.com/g/grpc-io/c/5o3EDPqz9is

## Abstract

Clarify that gRPC core will not mark server RPCs cancelled if they explicitly close with `GRPC_OP_SEND_STATUS_FROM_SERVER` using a non-`OK` status.  This is technically a core API change and thus needs a major revision increment.

## Background

gRPC core versions up to 10.X specify that the out argument of the `GRPC_OP_RECV_CLOSE_ON_SERVER` operation is a pointer to an int that specifies whether the RPC was cancelled. The definition specified in the comment is

```
      /** out argument, set to 1 if the call failed in any way (seen as a
          cancellation on the server), or 0 if the call succeeded */
```

> The term `in any way` is not clear, and the broadest (and current) definition is that it accounts for failures caused by client-side or server-side cancellations, deadline exceeded, maximum connection age exceeded, network resets, *and also explicit sending of non-OK status*.

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
The phrase "in any way" is not clear, and the broadest (and current) definition is that it accounts for failures caused by client-side or server-side cancellations, deadline exceeded, maximum connection age exceeded, network resets, *and also explicit sending of non-OK status*.
```

> The term `in any way` is not clear, and the broadest (and current) definition is that it accounts for failures caused by client-side or server-side cancellations, deadline exceeded, maximum connection age exceeded, network resets, *and also explicit sending of non-OK status*.

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
The term `in any way` is not clear, and the broadest (and current) definition is that it accounts for failures caused by client-side or server-side cancellations, deadlines being exceeded, maximum connection age being exceeded, network resets, *and also explicit sending of non-OK status*.
```

I couldn't think of a better way to "noun" "exceeded"... "Expirations"? But that doesn't really work for max connection age...

Author: connections exceeding their maximum age ?

Reviewer: SGTM

## Rationale

Calling an RPC cancelled if it completes for entirely expected reasons is confusing. Generally speaking, this distinction has not been noticed at the API layers but will become more common once the C++ callback API becomes formalized (since that has an OnCancel reaction for server RPCs). As a result, this issue should be clarified and fixed before the C++ callback API becomes common.

## Implementation

1. Decide if a server call is canceled by whether or not it could successfully send status
1. Fix core tests (wrapped language tests already had the proper expectations)
1. Mark a call failed according to channelz if it was canceled or if the server sent a non-OK status
1. Add a C++ test to validate that OnCancel is not called on non-OK explicit status

>  1. Fix the core surface comment about this topic and bump the core major API version

Reviewer: Minor: this is indented by one space. For a sublist, I think you need at least three spaces, but four is common.

Author: Fixed. Thanks1

## Open issues (if applicable)

* Does this affect the core wrapped language APIs?
  - This distinction is not visible to Ruby or the C++ synchronous API at all since the RPC in both of those cases is complete when returning status. Thus cancellation checks just see the effect of other forms of cancellation.
  - For the C++ asynchronous API, `IsCancelled` currently doesn't define its result. This change will also include an explciit definition of cancellation for C++.
  - Python does not expose this functionality to the server application.
  - For C#, ???

* Should this only trigger on explicit cancellations?

> - In practice, it doesn't matter if the application requested cancellation or cancellation happened because of a deadline or network problem; in any case, the RPC is failed for reasons out of the scope of the RPC. In practice, issues like deadline exceeded could be implemented using cancellation, so there is no strong distinction in any case.

Reviewer: Minor: I think the lines starting with `-` are intended to be underneath each item starting with `*`. To get that to render, they need to be indented. (Minimum three spaces, IIRC, but four is common.)

----
* Author(s): vjpai
* Approver: markdroth
* Status: Proposed
* Implemented in: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/pull/22991
* Last updated: May 28, 2020
* Discussion at https://groups.google.com/g/grpc-io/c/5o3EDPqz9is

## Abstract

Clarify that gRPC core will not mark server RPCs cancelled if they explicitly close with `GRPC_OP_SEND_STATUS_FROM_SERVER` using a non-`OK` status.  This is technically a core API change and thus needs a major revision increment.

## Background

gRPC core versions up to 10.X specify that the out argument of the `GRPC_OP_RECV_CLOSE_ON_SERVER` operation is a pointer to an int that specifies whether the RPC was cancelled. The definition specified in the comment is

```
      /** out argument, set to 1 if the call failed in any way (seen as a
          cancellation on the server), or 0 if the call succeeded */
```

The phrase "in any way" is not clear, and the broadest (and current) definition is that it accounts for failures caused by issues such as client-side or server-side cancellations, deadlines being exceeded, connections exceeding their maximum age, network resets, *and explicit sending of non-OK status*.

> ### Related Proposals

Reviewer 2: This can point to the gRFC for the callback API.

Author: Done.

## Rationale

Calling an RPC cancelled if it completes for entirely expected reasons is confusing. Generally speaking, this distinction has not been noticed at the API layers but will become more common once the C++ callback API becomes formalized (since that has an OnCancel reaction for server RPCs). As a result, this issue should be clarified and fixed before the C++ callback API becomes common.

## Implementation

The implementation is contained entirely within a single pull request at https://github.com/grpc/grpc/pull/22991 . This pull request does the following:

1. Decide if a server call is canceled by whether or not it could successfully send status
1. Fix core tests (wrapped language tests already had the proper expectations)
1. Mark a call failed according to channelz if it was canceled or if the server sent a non-OK status
1. Add a C++ test to validate that OnCancel is not called on non-OK explicit status
1. Fix the core surface comment about this topic and bump the core major API version
1. Add a C++ comment clarifying the meaning of `IsCancelled`

## Open issues (if applicable)

> * Does this affect the core wrapped language APIs?

Reviewer 2: What about PHP and ObjC?

Author: Not server languages, so this doesn't apply to them.

  - This distinction is not visible to Ruby or the C++ synchronous API at all since the RPC in both of those cases is complete when returning status. Thus cancellation checks just see the effect of other forms of cancellation.
  - For the C++ asynchronous API, `IsCancelled` currently doesn't define its result. This change also includes an explciit definition of cancellation for C++.
  - Python does not expose this functionality to the server application.

>   - For C#, ???

Reviewer 2: Please consult with @jtattermusch about this.  We should make sure this entry is filled in before merging this or the implementation PR.

Author: I've reached out again to him. I'll let you know when I fill in this content.
